docs/pages/tutorials.rst, before:

Tutorials
=========

Basic scPortrait Project
------------------------

This notebook demonstrates the basic functionality of scPortrait. It shows you how to initialize a scPortrait project, load input images, segment, extract and classify the provided data and how to generate cutting instructions for excision on a leica LMD7 microscope.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/_notebook_workflow_walkthrough.nblink


Segmentation Workflows
----------------------

This notebook walks you through the currently implemented segmentation workflows.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/_notebook_segmentation_workflows.nblink

Parsing Workflow
----------------
This notebook walks you through using scportrait's `parse` module to prepare imaging data obtained from an Opera Phenix microscope for downstream applications.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/example_parsing_notebook.ipynb

.. _example_stitching:

Stitching Workflow
------------------

This notebook walks you through using scportrait's `stitch` module to assemble whole-slide images from individual tif images.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/example_stitching_notebook.ipynb

Additional Notebooks
--------------------

Within scPortrait we provide a variety of different example datasets with an example processing notebooks. These notebooks are designed to give you a quick overview of the functionality of scPortrait and to help you get started with your own data.
You can find all of the example datasets and there notebooks [here](https://github.com/MannLabs/scPortrait-notebooks).

Commit message:

[DOC] add deep learning tutorial

docs/pages/tutorials.rst, after:

Tutorials
=========

Basic scPortrait Project
------------------------

This notebook demonstrates the basic functionality of scPortrait. It shows you how to initialize a scPortrait project, load input images, segment, extract and classify the provided data and how to generate cutting instructions for excision on a leica LMD7 microscope.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/_notebook_workflow_walkthrough.nblink


Segmentation Workflows
----------------------

This notebook walks you through the currently implemented segmentation workflows.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/_notebook_segmentation_workflows.nblink

Deep Learning in scPortrait
---------------------------

This notebook walks you through creating a pyTorch dataloader from your scPortrait single-cell image dataset and how to utilize transforms to augment your data.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/_notebook_deep_learning.nblink

Parsing Workflow
----------------
This notebook walks you through using scportrait's `parse` module to prepare imaging data obtained from an Opera Phenix microscope for downstream applications.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/example_parsing_notebook.ipynb

.. _example_stitching:

Stitching Workflow
------------------

This notebook walks you through using scportrait's `stitch` module to assemble whole-slide images from individual tif images.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   notebooks/example_stitching_notebook.ipynb

Additional Notebooks
--------------------

Within scPortrait we provide a variety of different example datasets with an example processing notebooks. These notebooks are designed to give you a quick overview of the functionality of scPortrait and to help you get started with your own data.
You can find all of the example datasets and there notebooks [here](https://github.com/MannLabs/scPortrait-notebooks).
